# Introduction
All information created for this project is available at [this Github repo](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/tree/master/Perlut). Please visit that page for more information regarding data tables, visualizations, and code used to complete this work.

## extraction history
Avian fecal samples were collected by the Perlut lab in 2016. Initial attempts to use a 96-well MoBio PowerSoil kit failed to generate significant numbers of amplicons likely because samples were too large to throughly lyse the fecal samples. A second batch of collections were performed in 2017; a modified PowerSoil extraction was performed which included: 
- using 2x recommended volumes of C1 and bead solution;
- heating bead solution at 37 C and shaking on orbital shaker for 4 hours; 
This lysate was then separated into 2 batches (as lysate volume exceed about 2 mL per sample) using the 96-well bead plates. The remainder of the PowerSoil extraction then proceeded following manufactuerers guidelines, with samples being eluted in 100 uL Solution C6 (Tris).  

Preliminary PCR results generatd few amplicons. DNA quantification of the raw extracted DNA suggested low concentrations among the samples tested (N = 16). To both increase concentration of samples and to remove potential PCR inhibitors all DNA was concentrated using a 0.5X SPRI bead cleanup (AmpureXP beads), after which the batched samples previously split up from a single lysate mixture into independent 96-well plate positions were recombined into a single DNA eluant. DNA was subsequently detectable in 5 of 8 samples tested, and preliminary PCR suggested detectable signal among 3 of 8 samples. PCR then proceeded using the modified (barcoded, Illumina adapter-containing) primers.  

PCR products were pooled in equimolar fashion except when concentrations fell below 1.0 nM; those samples for which there was less than that mass of DNA were pooled with a maximum of 20 uL per sample. The subsequent pool was then filtered using the QiaQuick PCR cleanup spin column. The library was then submitted to Northern Arizona University's sequencing center.

## sequencing at NAU
The pooled library of COI amplicons were sequenced using a MiSeq platform following 250 bp PE sequencing using V2 chemistry set for 500 cycles Northern Arizona University's sequencing center on January 17, 2017. Raw numbers of reads and general run metrics are available to view from [this Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1HM1Wlbai3aSHFAxqTNZ19zt7g_H8hf4ZlB8fvw4TlFQ/edit#gid=0). Less the fraction of reads dedicated to the positive control, about 2.4 million reads were generated across 87 controls (N = 13) and true (N = 74) samples (note that negative controls contributed just 0.78% of these reads).

## file naming

The initial names applied to the **.fastq** files automatically generated by NAU were simplified. The output from NAU for a file followed one of two naming conventions:

- `CONTROL-{SampleName}-xx-EN-USA-2017-076-JF_S{###}_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz` for mock community (positive) and negative control samples, with `SampleName` being specific to each sample, and `###` being either a two or three digit value assigned to the NAU sample sheet (effectively a redundant sample name they apply to each sample; shared with each forward and reverse **.fastq** file pair)
- `NHCS-{SampleName}-xx-VE-USA-2017-076-JF_S{###}_L001_R2_001.fastq.gz` for all true samples, following the same naming scheme as described above

The goal was to produce file names with the following scheme: `{SampleName}_{barcode}_L001_R{#}_001.fastq.gz`.

A series of steps were applied to achieve that, as [described here](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/blob/master/Perlut/renaming_scheme.md).  

### side note on mock community
The sample sheet submitted to the sequencing center incorrectly assigned the i7 and i5 index names (barcodes associated with 
the mock community sample (this was the only sample with an incorrect barcode designation). The files were recovered by accessing the `Undetermined_S0_...fastq` file pair, containing all reads which an index sequence was recognized by the sequencer itself, but not associated with any listed index sequence on the sample sheet. A `grep` search as follows isolated the barcode sequence pair used in the run, and this pair was then added into the standard `amptk` workflow:  
```
cat Undetermined_S0_L001_R1_001.fastq | grep -E '^@.*TGCGTCAA\+GTCTAGTG' -A 3 --no-group-separator > une-mockIM4_TGCGTCAA-GTCTAGTG_L001_R1_001.fastq &
cat Undetermined_S0_L001_R2_001.fastq | grep -E '^@.*TGCGTCAA\+GTCTAGTG' -A 3 --no-group-separator > une-mockIM4_TGCGTCAA-GTCTAGTG_L001_R2_001.fastq &
```

# amptk pipeline

[amptk](https://github.com/nextgenusfs/amptk) is a bioinformatic toolkit which performs all necessary tasks beginning with quality and adapter trimming of raw reads, clustering OTUs, denoising and chimera detection, through to assigning taxonomy to each identified cluster and generating (among other outputs) the list of per-sample taxa represented in the dataset. A full documentation of available parameters used for the program are [detailed here](http://amptk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html). 

A virtual environment was created when completing the installation process. _Recall that `amptk` is written in Python2, not Python3_. Initiall installation proceeded as described in Jon's suggested installation guide.  

> A note about versions - in addition to the core Python scripts comprising `amptk`, several dependencies were also installed. Versions used in this analysis include:
- amptk v. 1.1.0
- usearch9 v9.2.64_i86linux32
- usearch10 v10.0.240_i86linux32
- vsearch v2.6.2_linux_x86_64
- remaining python modules and R dependencies were installed via Conda (upgrade/updates with `pip` and/or `conda` performed 5-Mar-2017); install commands were:  

```
pip install -U -I biopython natsort pandas numpy matplotlib seaborn edlib biom-format psutil
conda install r-base bioconductor-dada2
conda install r-base bioconductor-dada2
```  

## adapter trimming and PE merging

The first step in the pipeline trims adapters (as a result of the insert length being less than the read length) and then uses USEARCH to merge paired end reads. Orphaned reads are discarded (this typically accounts for less then 2% of the overall number or reads in a sample). A single **.fastq.gz** file is output by concatenating all the individual paired reads with headers modified to specify the sample name. In addition, the **.amptk-demux.log** file documents the proportion of merged reads per sample. These ranged from the high end (~3.5 million; positive control) to just 26 total reads for a single sample. There was a significant distribution of numbers of reads for true samples which reflects the stochasticity inherent in amplifying targets from guano extracts, challenges in properly quantifying amplicon vs. primer dimer when pooling, and preference for pure DNA over extract (positive control vs. all else).  

>amptk initially failed because files weren't decompressed properly. This is resolved with the following command:

```
gzip -d *.gz
```

> In addition, an `illumina` directory was created prior to executing the command, and the script was designed to dump the output files into that directory. The entire script was submitted using our SLURM job submission software; pertinent information regarding the amptk-specific arguments were as follows:  

```
amptk illumina \
-i /mnt/lustre/macmaneslab/devon/guano/NAU/Perlut/fqraw \
-o trim \
--rescue_forward on \
--require_primer off \
--min_len 160 \
--full_length \
--read_length 300 \
-f GGTCAACAAATCATAAAGATATTGG \
-r GGWACTAATCAATTTCCAAATCC \
--cpus 24 \
--cleanup
```

## dropping samples

There is an important tradeoff between the likelihood that a read is the result of index bleed versus a true representation of the amplicons in a sample; if one is to account and filter for index-bleed, then one is to likely reduce the number of reads in a sample. In addition, because the mock community proportion of reads was large in this run, the likelihood of index bleed is higher than if the positive control had a moderate number of reads (proportional to per-sample read numbers). There are additional filtering parameters applied to account for this, though these filtering parameters work best when the low-read number samples are discarded. The following code was executed to drop the samples with less than 4800 reads, as that value represented samples with less than 0.1% total reads indexed to this project on the lane. Note that this is an arbitrary cut off, and drops out many samples; in addition, no negative control is included above this threshold.   

> note that a `dropd` directory was created to pass the output files into; the following command was executed within that `dropd` directory

```
amptk remove \
-i /mnt/lustre/macmaneslab/devon/guano/NAU/Perlut/illumina/trim.demux.fq.gz \
-t 3600 \
-o dropd.demux.fq

gzip dropd.demux.fq
```

This is a significant threshold as it drops 51 of 88 possible samples. However, the total number of reads which are excluded from the dataset is just 2% of the overall amount. A separate workflow in which all samples are retained is also run (and described herein) - this allows us to carry through both a conservative and liberal strategy and compare if major difference arise in OTU abundance, index bleed thresholds, etc. Analysis of the conservative (reduced sample) dataset has the suffix `dropd` applied; while the workflow with all samples are included are termed `trimd`.  

Clustering was performed independently - once for the `dropd` and once for the `trimd` datasets - while filtering was applied to the `dropd` dataset only. One consequence of independent clustering approaches is the OTU numbers aren't comparable - what sequence represents OTU1 in the `dropd` dataset isn't necessarily the same sequence for OTU1 in the `trimd` dataset.  

## clustering for OTUs

This is a two step process in which the **.fastq** file containing all reads is parsed first using the `DADA2` algorithm creating **iseq** candidate sequences (unique sequences which are not clustered), then these unique sequences are clustered to a 97% similarity using the more traditional `UCLUST` approach. See Jon's documentation describing the differences [here](http://amptk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/clustering.html). In brief, **iseq** values are clustered at a 100% identity, whereas the resulting **OTUs** are clustered at 97% identity, meaning that the **iseq** sequences are more exclusive than the **OTUs**.  

In addition there is a chimera filtering step applied to the data; this requires the installation of the COI database provided by amptk:

```
amptk install -i COI
```

Then execute the clustering with the following code:

```
amptk dada2 \
--fastq dropd.demux.fq.gz \
--out dropd \
--length 180 \
--platform illumina \
--uchime_ref COI
```

Note that both `dropd` and `trimd` datasets had the same code applied.  
> The code above specifies the command used for the `dropd` dataset. For the `trimd` dataset, a different input file and different output name were substituted; everything else remains the same.  

The output contains a pair of files which are applied in the next filtering strategy (for index bleed): the `.cluster.otu_table.txt` file which follows a traditional OTU matrix format, as well as the accompanying `.cluster.otus.fa` file which contains the OTU id in the header and the associated sequence. Each dataset is then filtered according to the following commands.  

|  | trim | dropd |
| --- | --- | --- |
| # OTUs clustered | 1,912 | 1,792 |
| # reads mapped to OTUs | 3,543,867 | 3,472,563 |
| # iSeqs clustered | 3,525 | 3,110 |
| # reads mapped to iSeqs | 3,549,960 | 3,478,881 |


## filtering

Because a mock community was added to this project, the proportion of reads that are likely misassigned can be estimated on a per-OTU basis. In brief, we are certain of the OTUs likely to be present in mock community; any additional OTU is the result of index bleed. By calculating the proportion of reads that are present in our mock sample which _shouldn't be there_ we can estimate what fraction of reads (on a per-OTU basis) should be subtracted from all true samples.

This process takes place by applying an initial filtering step that filters reads using the most strict criteria (taking the largest instance of an OTU bleed and applying that percentage to filter across true samples); intermediate files are kept to investigate how the index-bleed is distributed on a per-OTU basis. I have maintained a [separate document](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/blob/master/Rutgers/filtering_notes.md) describing the detailed steps used to apply what I feel are the most appropriate filtering strategies for this dataset. In addition, data output from these filtering steps is contained in a [supplementary spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1OQVuGjC5trpjTDsATPYikvr6J0B_bCLT1yoJc7i8NzQ/edit#gid=1765686535).  

In brief, this amounted to determining the proportion of index bleed _into the mock community_, the proportion of index bleed _from mock community into true samples_, and identifying any OTUs which were clustered yet not identified in the mock fasta file.  

- Following a conservative data filtering approach, an initial dataset containing **100** samples, **953 OTUs** and **9,335,697 reads** is reduced to **67 samples**, **442 OTUs** and **5,626,434 reads**.   
- The less stringent approach retains signal from all **99 samples**, **454 OTUs**, and **5,655,871 reads**.

 A pair of output files after completing filtering steps are applied to then assign taxonomic information to our remaining reads. Following these steps, the `trimd` dataset was used exclusively to assign taxonomy to the OTUs present.  

## taxonomy assignment
As described in the [amptk taxonomy](http://amptk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/taxonomy.html) section, the database used to assign taxonomy is derived from the Barcode of Life Database ([BOLD](http://v4.boldsystems.org/)). The sequences present in the database we're using are the result of two sequential clustering processes.
- BOLD's BIN data serve as the initial sequence material. These sequences themselves are initially derived from [a clustering process](http://v4.boldsystems.org/index.php/Public_BarcodeIndexNumber_Home).
- The BIN sequences are then clustered locally by amptk to 99% identity. These data are further processed to train the UTAX program which can be used in taxonomic assignment/prediction.  

> This database was updated as of 14-sept-2017, following the [release](https://github.com/nextgenusfs/amptk/releases/tag/1.0.0) of amptk v-1.0.0.  
> Complete database download is [available here](https://osf.io/4xd9r/files/)

Taxonomy was explored using both the _hybrid_ approach (default in amptk) as well as a _usearch only_ approach. In both instances, the `--method` reflected the given approach. See Jon's description of the steps used in his documentation at the link above.  

The following code was applied (in this example the method is the `hybrid` approach):  

```
amptk taxonomy \
--input /mnt/lustre/macmaneslab/devon/guano/NAU/p8-2/filt/filt_final/fullFilt.final.binary.txt \
--fasta /mnt/lustre/macmaneslab/devon/guano/NAU/p8-2/filt/filt_final/fullFilt.filtered.otus.fa \
--out rut16_h \
--db COI \
--method usearch \
--mapping_file /mnt/lustre/macmaneslab/devon/guano/NAU/p8-2/illumina/dropd.mapping_file.txt
```

The output fasta sequence was uploaded to [the Github repo](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/tree/master/Rutgers), while the OTU table with taxonomic information was added to the [supplementary spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1OQVuGjC5trpjTDsATPYikvr6J0B_bCLT1yoJc7i8NzQ/edit#gid=860400922) as **Table S6**. Note that this table is in a binary "presence/absence" format, thus any value of `1` indicates that an OTU has passed our filters and counts as detected (present), while a value of `0` indicates that there is not sufficient evidence of detection for an OTU in a given sample.  

> Note that "absence" means a lot of different things:
> - it could be that the OTU is not truly in the sample of guano
> - it could be because an OTU was present but not amplified and sequenced  
> - it could be the OTU was sequenced but there wasn't enough reads to pass our filters (with `--index_bleed` and `--subtract` arguments in `amptk filter`))

 # Further analyses

 An R script was then used to manipulate the output `rut16_h.otu_table.taxonomy.txt` file which includes both further data filtering, as well as the calculations for frequency tables and visualizations - [see here](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/blob/master/Rutgers/OTUanalysis.R).  

 > One such data filtering taking place here is the removal of reads associated with the mock community. The index-bleed from the mock sequences into true samples is still detected in **Table S6**, however, these are removed within the R script when producing the final summary tables  

Please see the Rutgers project [Github repo](https://github.com/devonorourke/guano/blob/master/Rutgers) for data summaries and visualizations.  
